---
layout: post
title: LTE-Unlicensed-How Cellular Providers are destroying the Freedom of Unlicensed Spectrum.
comments: true
brief:  With cellular providers jumping onto the unlicensed spectrum bandwagon on the premise that it is free for everyone, a careful examination is required to ensure that big businesses don’t benefit at the expense of a public good.
---

<!-- *All that we see or seem is but a dream within a dream. -- Edgar Allan Poe* -->

-----

Unlicensed spectrum, much like a public park or a playground, is a public good.
It is a set of airwaves designated by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
as open and free to all. Its purpose: to enable everyday low-power short-range
wireless devices like garage openers, cordless phones, baby monitors and medical
devices; to provide bandwidth for industrial, scientific and medical research (
ISM bands), commonly used by WiFi and Bluetooth; and to give free spectrum for
hobbyists and enterprises alike.

Today, billions of devices use the unlicensed spectrum for a variety of purposes
ranging from simple Internet connectivity to complex sensor networks, with even
more expected from the Internet-of-Things (IoT) revolution. Unlicensed spectrum
continues to be the go-to medium to deploy any new wireless technology, be it
Bluetooth-connected wearables or WiFi-connected vehicles.  It can be said that
the FCC, by providing free spectrum to the technology world, has done to the
wireless technology what ARPANET did to the Internet.

But give a city a beautiful bustling park, and it will eventually come under the
prying eyes of big real-estate companies. What if through some loopholes in the
park regulations, they are allowed to open luxury hotels and malls? Since the
parks are free to everyone, who is to stop a certain few from commercializing
them? Welcome to the world of LTE-Unlicensed.

LTE-Unlicensed is a technology that will allow big cellular providers like
Verizon and AT&T to run LTE in the unlicensed spectrum to deliver more data to
their customers, and by simple logic, make more money. Unlike the licensed
spectrum bands that are auctioned by the government for billions of dollars,
there is no cost for the cellular providers to use the unlicensed spectrum. This
represents a win-win scenario for the cellular providers as they can not only
decongest their licensed spectrum by offloading traffic to the unlicensed
spectrum, but also charge their users for the additional spectrum. But if the
cellular companies are winning, someone must be losing.

##Who will lose?

Today, most of the cellular devices such as smartphones and tablets have a
separate WiFi, Bluetooth and LTE interface. Among these, WiFi and Bluetooth run
in the same unlicensed ISM bands. People in homes and offices regularly use the
WiFi interface to connect to the Internet. WiFi networks offer privacy and
security for enterprises, and are relatively easy to install.  And unlike
cellular networks, they don’t come with usage caps and fees.  Bluetooth, on the
other hand, is often used to connect short-range devices such as headphones,
sensors and so on.  Now add LTE-Unlicensed to the mix, and the LTE interface will
start running on the ISM bands, and not surprisingly, interfere with other
networks.

Millions of cellular devices will start using the WiFi spectrum for cellular
services. As a result, the WiFi networks in our homes and offices will see a drop
in their speeds. Moreover, people and businesses will be forced to purchase more
data from the cellular companies while their WiFi networks are beaten by the
onslaught of LTE-Unlicensed devices. Not just WiFi, but LTE-Unlicensed will
possibly interfere with Bluetooth and Zigbee devices. Furthermore, a host of
future wireless technologies will never see the daylight because the unlicensed
spectrum will get incredibly crowded. Clearly, this is not the first time when
big businesses have entered a new market and destroyed the smaller enterprises,
competition and ultimately, innovation.

## Unlicensed is not the same as unregulated

Federal law requires that a device operating in the unlicensed spectrum must meet
certain requirements and obtain an FCC certification. Broadly speaking, it must
transmit below a specified power level and must limit its spurious emissions.
This ensures that devices or technologies using the unlicensed spectrum do so in
a friendly manner, and cause minimal interference to licensed devices.

However, time and again, businesses and manufacturers have broken the FCC rules:
They have deployed devices that have intentionally damaged or interfered with
other transmissions. The FCC in response has taken stern action by slapping
monetary penalties on the defaulters [1].  However, excluding a few rouge
elements, surprisingly, the sharing of unlicensed spectrum in non-commercial and
commercial markets has been largely successful. This is because the majority of
the users of unlicensed spectrum are WiFi devices, and WiFi has an inbuilt
sharing mechanism based on fairness. Specifically, WiFi uses the ‘Listen-Before-
Talk’ principle, where each device waits for its turn to transmit, thus giving
every device the opportunity to transmit successfully.

Anyone can install a WiFi router at home; use the unlicensed spectrum to get
wireless connectivity and be assured of fair access to the unlicensed spectrum
along with his/her neighbors. On the other hand, businesses can sell WiFi
services in airports and public places, be fair to other WiFi users, while
differentiating among themselves based on additional services and infrastructure
-- all within the FCC regulations.

But LTE-Unlicensed is not WiFi. Though LTE-Unlicensed may follow FCC regulations,
is will not behave like WiFi. Given its inherent design, LTE is not meant to
share the spectrum with others. This is a huge challenge because existing FCC
regulations will not be enough to ensure fair sharing between LTE-Unlicensed and
WiFi devices.

##Bluetooth and WiFi can coexist, why not LTE-Unlicensed and WiFi ?

Thankfully, Bluetooth has never been a commercial service. Though WiFi is often
commercially sold, it never really had to compete with Bluetooth devices. This
means rather than competition, it has been a case of coexistence between WiFi
and Bluetooth. This is indeed reflected in the coexistence amendments that were
proposed after some serious discussions between the WiFi and Bluetooth Standards
groups.

But LTE-Unlicensed is not like Bluetooth. Not even close. LTE or cellular
companies such as AT&T and Verizon are fierce competitors and for them, it is a
question of competition, not coexistence. There is no guarantee that they will
play nice with each other, or with WiFi. They can intentionally harm and
interfere with other users. Each cellular company will not only want to attract
as many customers as possible from its rival companies, but also the WiFi users
who happily use the spectrum for free.  And therein lies the difference. When
there are technologies that are going to compete with each other using the same
resource, coexistence cannot be a solution.

##The net-neutrality issue, again

Much has been said and written about the neutrality of the Internet. There are
service providers who want to differentiate Internet traffic based on the
content, and then there is another group that claims the Internet to be a public
good and wants all traffic to be treated equally.  Ultimately, the FCC in its
ruling decided to uphold the net-neutrality of Internet.  Once again, in the
context of the unlicensed spectrum, the notion of public good has come into
question. For whom is the unlicensed spectrum meant? The cellular companies can
claim to benefit the public at large by promising better services, but this
comes with the serious impact on existing WiFi and other small networks that we
own in our daily lives.

##Conclusion

With cellular providers jumping onto the unlicensed spectrum bandwagon on the
premise that it is free for everyone, a careful examination is required to
ensure that big businesses don’t benefit at the expense of a public good. After
all, a lemonade stand in a public park is endearing, a mall isn’t.